- [Instructor] So in the last
few videos, we've produced
a scrollable subclass of
the tkinter Listbox class.
We then populated the list
from our music database.
So we've got everything we
need to move the database
functionality into another
subclass to produce a listbox
that automatically displays
data from a database table.
But before we start, we
have to decide how we're
going to initialise the
instances of our new class.
Now, we're obviously
going to have to tell it
the name of the table that it should get
the data from and which
field it needs to display.
So it's a good idea to provide
a database connexion as well
so that our classes don't have
to rely on a global variable.
A sort order would also be useful.
The songs should be listed in track order,
the order they appear on the album,
but we're displaying the song titles.
So sorting by the song title wouldn't be
what users were expecting to see.
Now, we can make the default
sort order the displayed field
so that if a different
sort order isn't specified,
the list will then sort
the items alphabetically.
Now, at the moment, when
we run the programme,
only one of our listboxes
displays data to start with.
So what we need is some way to trigger
the initial load of
data for those instances
that will display data as
soon as they're created.
And we also need some way
to get the other listboxes
to load their data
once we know the ID of
the artist or album,
and in fact it would make
sense to use the same method
in both cases and just
pass none for the ID
when we're loading the first lists.
All right, so that's probably
enough to start with.
So let's go ahead now and
create DataListbox class
and I'm gonna add this
after this Scrollbox class
that we've created in the jukebox.py file.
So I'm gonna add the customary two lines,
two blank lines between classes here,
and we're gonna start
with class DataListBox,
and in parentheses, it's
going to be Scrollbox, colon,
enter there, a space, and
then we're going to define
our init method, so def, space, __init__,
and I'll just select that automatically.
The first parameter in parentheses
was added automatically,
self, but we want these
other arguments now,
so comma, space, window,
comma, space, connexion,
comma, space, table,
comma, space, field,
comma, space, sort_order
equals, and two
parentheses, left and right.
Then lastly, comma, space,
and then star, star,
K-W-args or kwargs.
All right, and I'm just gonna
put in, in a comment here,
what the code would be for Python 2.
Scrollbox.__init__(self,
window, **kwargs),
and something there for Python 2,
just so if you're following
along with Python 2,
you'll know what to do there.
All right, but in our case,
we're going to do a super,
parentheses, dot __init__,
and we're gonna pass
to this super call window and **kwargs.
Next, we're going to
do self.cursor is equal
to connection.cursor,
or call to the cursor
method, to be more precise.
We've got self.table is equal to table,
and self.field is equal to field.
Let's just move this up a little bit
so we can see what we're doing here.
And we wanna build a SQL
query now, so self.sql_select
is equal to SELECT in
double quotes with a space,
plus self.field,
plus, double quotes, comma, space, _id,
end of double quotes, plus
another set of double quotes
with the word FROM with a
space around the word FROM
plus self.table, and then
we'll put if sort_order,
colon, and then we'll do
self.sql_select is equal
to a space with double quotes with a space
around the text, ORDER
BY, that we're adding,
plus, then in single quotes,
comma, .join(sort_order)
and then we'll put an
else: otherwise for that.
It's going to be
self.sql_select equals ORDER BY
in double quotes with a
space around both terms,
at the start and end, in other words,
plus self_...
Sorry, self.field.
I'm gonna put another line
there to keep Python happy
with the method, the function
that we've got below that.
All right, so starting off
here, out init method is calling
the super method for
Scrollbox, and I've included
the Python 2 syntax on
line 29 as well for that.
So next, we create data attributes
from the parameters
passed to the init method.
Now, we're going to work with a cursor
so we store that rather
than the connexions.
You can see here, we're
storing the actual cursor
and not the connexion on line 32.
Now, you should write a
class to accept a cursor
rather than a connexion, but
it's probably more useful
to provide a connexion.
Now, I call it the column parameter field
because we're working in the
grid layout_manager down here,
and column could then get
confusing for that reason.
And table of course is the table
that we're going to be
selecting the data from.
Now, the sort_order argument
here, we have to find that
as a tuple to allow the caller
to specify multiple columns
to sort on if they need to.
Now, this doesn't make a lot
of sense with our tables,
but if we use the view, for example,
from the previous videos,
then it could get useful.
And we're also trying to
make the classes as general
as possible so they can't be
used in other programmes that
perhaps have got more complicated
database schemes in place.
So the sql_select attribute's
pretty straightforward,
if you're reading that from line 36.
Just contains a basic select statement
to retrieve the required
field and the row ID.
Now, we're putting a
restriction on the database
that our class will work with.
The table must have a column called _id.
You can see that in here on
line 36, and that's of course
used to uniquely identify
each row on the table.
And actually that's not
unusual, but if you wanted
to remove that restriction,
then you could request
a primary key field as another parameter.
We will not be doing that here.
Now I've actually made a change here,
so what I'm going to do is that's gonna be
if sort_order, that actually
should have been if sql_sort...
I'm confusing myself here.
Sql_sort for that as well.
So what I was trying to do
there is specify a SQL sort
attribute with an order by
clause, and we're catering for
the fact that they may be
passing that sort_order or not,
so we're going to default to
the field and order by that
if I don't pass a parameter
with the requested sort_order.
Now, you could leave the default blank
so that the data isn't sorted at all.
That's the sort of detail you decide
when designing your classes,
and as long as the users
are aware of how it works,
then that would be fine.
Now, I'm not including doc
strings in the classes,
because that would make
the videos too long,
but that would certainly be
something you should add,
especially when creating classes
that should tend to be reused.
All right, and again, in
the case of a sort_order
being passed, we're using
.join with the sort_order
and separating them by
commas as is required
to fulfil the syntax for
an order by clause of SQL.
All right, so the class at the
moment doesn't load any data,
so we need to implement the requery method
that it's going to need.
Now, if we're going to allow
the listboxes to be requeried
so that they can show new
data, we need some way
to clear the existing data
out, so for that reason,
we're also gonna add a clear method.
So let's go ahead and add those.
So we'll start with the clear method.
So def clear, and of course self
is the default parameter there, argument.
Then we'll do a self.delete,
in parentheses, zero, comma, space,
tkinter.END, uppercase
letters, and right parenthesis.
And the next one we want
is the requery method
that we just talked about, so def requery,
and argument is self again,
automatically added by IntelliJ.
Then we're going to print
(self.sql_select + self.sql_sort)
for debugging purposes.
But what we're going to do
is put a TODO delete this line
so we know to come back later
once the testing is
complete and remove that.
And in terms of what we're going to do now
is from our requerying, we
first clear the listbox contents
before re-loading, which would make sense
so we haven't got duplicate entries.
So we do a self.clear
to call our clear method
that we just defined on line 43,
and I just remove one of those lines.
And after self.clear,
then we're gonna put for
value in self.cursor...
Oops, that should have been cursor.
Then we wanna do self.insert,
and the argument is gonna be tkinter.END,
comma, space, value,
and the value zero in square brackets,
then end of parentheses.
So the clear method, as
you can see on line 42,
and the code's on line 43,
that uses the listbox delete
method and we're specifying
the entire range of values,
going from zero to tkinter.n constant,
and that constant represents
the last item in the list.
So consequently, calling that
will actually delete all the entries.
Now, the requery method that
we've defined on line 45,
that's where our SQL statement's built up,
from the sql_select part as
well as the sql_sort part.
So I've printed that out,
but the other thing we need
to do is actually add that,
so I'm talking about how it's
being added, but we haven't
actually done that yet,
so it's gonna be self.cursor.execute,
and it's gonna be
self.sql_select + self.sql_sort.
So obviously we're
printing it out on line 46.
Line 47, we're actually
executing the combination
of the sql_select that we've
generated on line 36 up here,
then the sql_sort that we're creating
on either line 38 or line
40, depending on whether
that argument's been
passed for the sort_order.
So then we're executing the SQL
code, as I said, on line 47.
All right, once we've done that,
the rest of this code
should look pretty familiar.
We're executing the query
and looping over the
cursor as you can see here.
We're executing the query here on line 47.
We're clearing the listbox contents
and then we're looping
through the values one by one
and then actually adding
each one to the listbox.
And just a note here, on line 52,
remember that we get a
tuple representing each row.
Now as our query specified
the column we want
and the ID, we add the
first item from the tuple
into the list and that's
why we use the value zero
in the square brackets to
indicate that first value.
So at that point, that
should actually work.
So we should be able
to test this class now
before the video ends, so
let's remove all the code
to populate the lists
from the artist listbox
and replace it with a call
to this requery method
just to check that and see
that it'll actually work.
So to do that, we'll come down here,
down to the setup here for
Artists Listbox on line 101.
And what we wanna do
first is we wanna change
the definition, so we
wanna change Scrollbox now
to use our new class we've created,
so that's going to be
DataListBox, and next,
we're going to remove the SQL code here.
And instead, we're going to replace that
with a call to artistList.requery.
We're just gonna be calling the code
that we've just written.
So let's check that first
to make sure it works.
And we've got an error,
and of course the reason is
we haven't specified our other parameters.
We need to go ahead and do that.
So we've got at the moment,
we've got DataListBox,
we've got mainWindow, but
we also need a connexion,
we need a table name, and we also need
the column that we want to be displaying.
So, we'll add those.
So comma, space, conn, for the connexion.
Comma, space, artists in double
quote, being the table name,
and comma, space, name,
being the actual field or column.
And there's another option
there for sort_order,
but we're not going to add that yet.
We can add that option in later,
just to see that it does work.
Let's go ahead and do
that and run that again.
This time, you can see we've
got the SQL printing out,
and if we go back and
have a look at our code,
we can see that we have
got our artists populated,
so it is working now, which is fantastic.
All right, so let's continue on now.
Close that down.
All right, so now that we've done that,
we should be able to
replace the other two calls
to our albums and also our songs.
So we wanna change albumList here
where it's just calling Scrollbox.
We wanna change that now
to call our DataListBox
and the arguments are going
to be mainWindow again,
conn for our connexion,
comma, space, this time it's
going to be albums for the
table name, comma, space,
name for the field/column name,
comma, space, this time
we'll add a sort_order,
so I'm going to do sort_order equals,
and I want parentheses,
and within the parentheses,
we want name in double quotes and a comma,
and we add a second parenthesis there.
Okay, like so, and we'll
delete that line there.
Last entry.
Then what we need to do on the
line immediately after that,
we wanna put albumList.requery,
and we leave the grid
and the configures there were before,
and we also leave the
binding as it was before.
And lastly, for songList, we've
got the Scrollbox code here.
We'll change that also to be DataListBox,
and the arguments for that
will be mainWindow, conn again,
and for the table, it's going
to be songs, comma, space,
title is going to be
the name of the field,
and let's also specify a
sort_order for this one,
and we can just specify
that as track and title
in parentheses, double
quotes, separated by a comma,
and finish off the right parenthesis.
And then of course on the next line,
we need to do a requery,
so songList.requery.
All right, so let's
actually try running this.
You can see the three sets of
SQL that have been executed
there for artists, albums,
and songs, and incidentally,
there's no good reason
for sorting the songList
on both track and title,
really other than to prove
that the code doesn't crash
and so that we can check
the SQL statement that we're printing out,
and you can see there's multiple
sort_orders quite happily
separated both with a comma
and made that valid code.
But importantly, let's just
actually check this works.
And you can see that we've
got it all working nicely.
And now all three Listboxes at this point
are now showing data,
which is what we wanted,
and again, the SQL output
that we've got over here,
I'll just move this
over, looks fine as well.
So that's actually pretty cool.
With subclass of tkinter.listbox
to reduce our scrollable
listbox, and just to confirm,
we have got scrolling enabled
for all three listboxes there,
so that's working nicely,
and we can now load that data
from a database table as you can see.
Working pretty well.
But we're still not done at this point,
and in the next video,
we're going to add the code
to allow our DataListboxes
to be linked together.
Then, when we select an item
in one list, the related
data will show in another
like it was doing earlier
before we made the change to
move over to the DataListbox.
But let's work on that in the next video.